wish =

we need a new tooluse hook bound for the driver (pretooluse)

we need to protect the route

---

we've found that drivers often get impatient and decide to look into the $route dir, read the stones, and game the system

the point of thought routes is to control the focus of the driver to specific bounded scopes.

when a driver looks at the next 3 stones along the route in order to 'do it all faster', it defeats the purpose - they just spread their focus too loosely

---

worse, sometimes they even read the .guard files, and totally game the system. instead of proper self reviews, they emit performative outputs to make it look like they reviewed - just to say 'done'

---

most severely, we've even seen cases where they attempt to reach into $route/.route/ metadirs and mutate the passage.jsonl directly. totally unacceptable!

---

so, we need a pretooluse hook that blocks attempts to mutate $route/*.stone, $route/.guard, and $route/.route/**/* files

explicitly deny FileRead, FileWrite, and FileEdit tools

but also, use regex against bash tools to prevent any more malicious attempts to access them as well. (e.g., cat , etc). (hopefully, detection of $route relative path inclusion will narrow it down)

---

note, its still important that they can emit the route artifacts (e.g., $route/xyz.v1.i1.md)

but the .guard and .stone files must be protected, and the .route dir must be protected, within the bound route 

---

claude's pretooluse system requires us to exit.code(2) in order to block - so we just need to detect and block

-----

also, we should expose a human only `route.mutate allow|block' command for this too; by default, all routes are blocked. but! if allowed, human can grant privilege via a flag set in the $route/.route/.priviledge.mutate.json; (no file = blocked, file w/ correct syntax = allowed; block just deletes the file again)

---

and probably, we should author this hook as `route.mutate guard --mode hook`

see how getDriverRole registers the other hooks for context


----


the hook guard itself should be shell only (grants should be the normal js cli flow, but the hook shell only)

leverage the integration test patterns used in `rhachet-roles-ehmpathy` where it tests its .agent/repo=ehmpathy/role=mechanic/inits/* hooks (use the gh cli to get an exact template of those test patterns)
